OPENING SESSION 
 
1.   Approval of the Agenda 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
A member pointed out a minor typographical error on the Agenda within Item 2. 
 
Motion: Amaral/Shirvani 
 
THAT the General Faculties Council approve the Agenda, as amended. 

Approval of the Open Session Minutes of January 21, 2013 

 
2. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Motion:  Amaral/Molzahn 
 
THAT the General Faculties Council approve the Minutes of January 21, 2013. 

 
3.  Comments from the President 
 
There were no documents. 

CARRIED 

CARRIED 

General Faculties Council / 3/14/2013 
Page 4 

 
President and Chair, Dr Indira Samarasekera, welcomed all in attendance to the 388th meeting of General 
Faculties Council (GFC) and reported: 
 
-  On the transition of incoming and outgoing Students’ Union members.  She warmly bid farewell to the 
Students’  Union  executive  members  leaving  office  and  welcomed  new  members,  most  notably 
Students’ Union President-Elect Petros Kusmu, to General Faculties Council (GFC). 

 
-  On the Provincial Budget.  She reported that the recently-unveiled Provincial Budget, containing the 
deepest cuts to Alberta’s post-secondary sector in over a decade, was unexpected.  She added that, 
subsequently, the University has been granted an extension to finalize its 2013-2014 budget and that, 
in  addition,  the  2013  Comprehensive  Institutional  Plan  (CIP)  would  need  to  be  revised  accordingly.  
She stated that the Change@UAlberta.ca website will be updated regularly to keep students, faculty, 
and staff apprised of developments regarding the impact of the Provincial Budget and the University’s 
plans to move forward. 

 
Dr Samarasekera invited comments and questions in relation to the Provincial Budget, and members and 
attendees expressed several, including, but not limited to:  how the University of Alberta revised budget will 
be determined; whether increases to Mandatory Non-Instructional Fees (MNIFs)  were being considered; 
clarification  about  the  “Letter  of  Expectation”  from  the  Ministry  of  Enterprise  and  Advanced  Education 
(EAE); whether classes with low enrolment would be cancelled; and whether the President would be joining 
the post-secondary education spending cuts protest at the Alberta Legislature on Friday, March 15, 2013. 
 
ACTION ITEMS 
4.  New Members of GFC 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenter: Indira Samarasekera, President and Chair, GFC 
 
Motion I:  Yamagishi/Cormack 
 
MOTION I: TO APPOINT/REAPPOINT  [This motion may be proposed only by statutory members of GFC 
– VPs, Deans, statutory students or elected faculty members]:   
 
The following undergraduate student representatives to serve on GFC for terms beginning immediately and 
ending April 30, 2013: 
 

 
Jason Davidson 

Mary Zhou 

Samuel Gagnon 
Sabin Bozso 

Faculty of Agricultural, Life and 
Environmental Sciences 
Faculty of Agricultural, Life and 
Environmental Sciences 
Campus Saint-Jean 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 

The  following  undergraduate  student  members  elected  by  the  Students’  Union  (SU)  to  the  Board  of 
Governors and appointed to GFC for terms that are concurrent with their terms on the Board (May 1, 2013 
to April 30, 2014): 
 
 
 
 

Petros Kusmu 
Brent Kelly 

President, SU 
SU Appointee 

 

 

General Faculties Council / 3/14/2013 
Page 5 

Brent Epperson 

            President, GSA                                                            

 
Colin More 

Vice-President (Academic), GSA                                                                   

 Lisa M Collins 

Vice-Provost and University Registrar 

 
The following graduate student member elected by the Graduate Students’ Association (GSA) to the Board 
of Governors and appointed to GFC for a term that is concurrent with his term on the Board (May 1, 2013 
to April 30, 2014): 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                          CARRIED 
 
Motion II:  Swanson/Kennelly 
 
The following ex officio member to serve on GFC for a term beginning July 1, 2013 and extending for the 
duration of her appointment: 
 
 
 
The following statutory faculty members who have been elected or re-elected by their Faculty to serve on 
GFC for terms beginning immediately and ending June 30, 2013: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following statutory undergraduate student members nominated by the Students’ Union (SU) to serve 
on GFC for terms beginning May 1, 2013 and ending April 30, 2014: 
 
 
 
 
The following statutory graduate student member nominated by the Graduate Students’ Association (GSA) 
to serve on GFC for a term beginning May 1, 2013 and ending April 30, 2014: 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                          CARRIED 
 
5.  Course  Feedback  Prior  to Withdrawal  Deadlines  –  Proposed  Changes  to  Section  23.4  (Evaluation 

Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 
 Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 

Vice-President (Academic), SU 
Vice-President (Student Life), SU 

Tarek El-Bialy 
Ron McElhaney 
Jutta Preksaitis 
Amy Tse 

 
Dustin Chelen 
William Lau 

Procedures and Grading System) of the University Calendar 

 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenters:    Bill  Connor,  Vice-Provost  (Academic  Programs  and  Instruction)  and  Chair,  GFC  Academic 
Standards Committee; Ada Ness, Associate Registrar (Enrolment Services), Office of the Registrar 
 
Purpose  of  the  Proposal:    To  work  to  ensure  students  receive  feedback  in  their  courses  prior  to  term 
withdrawal deadlines. 
 
Discussion: 
Vice-Provost  (Academic  Programs  and  Instruction)  Bill  Connor  briefed  members  on  the  history  of  the 
proposal,  noting  that  it  originated  from  a  discussion  with  students  regarding  their  requests  for  individual 
course  feedback  before  term  withdrawal  deadlines;  he  noted  that  the  proposal  before  members  reflects 
existing UAPPOL policy on assessment and grading that speaks to the provision of  such feedback.  He 

General Faculties Council / 3/14/2013 
Page 6 

Provincial Budget 

 
stated  that  this  proposal  had  been  discussed  and  recommended  forward  by  the  appropriate  standing 
committees of GFC and had been well supported throughout the process. 
 
During the ensuing discussion, members expressed several comments and questions, including, but not 
limited  to:  clarification  with  regard  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  “substantive”  in  the  proposed  wording; 
whether a percentage regarding the amount of feedback to students should be added within the proposal; 
that  providing feedback in  large  classes  would  be  difficult;  that  instructors/professors  may feel  forced  to 
provide  substantive  feedback  early  in  the  course;  that  the  Association  of  Academic  Staff  –  University  of 
Alberta (AASUA) had not been consulted on the proposal; that the proposal represent a cultural change 
which will allow students to obtain knowledge of their performance earlier in their courses; that students 
have a right to important, meaningful, and considerable feedback earlier, rather than later, into a course; 
and possible use of the word “appropriate” instead of “substantive.” 
 
Motion: Rodgers/Chelen 
 
THAT General Faculties Council approve the proposed changes to Section 23.4 (Evaluation Procedures 
and Grading System) of the University Calendar, as submitted by the Office of the Registrar in cooperation 
with  the  Office  of  the  Provost  and  Vice-President  (Academic)  and  as  set  forth  in  Attachment  1,  to  be 
effective 2013-2014 (Fall Term) and for publication in the 2014-2015 University Calendar.                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                          CARRIED 
 
