DISCUSSION ITEMS 
 
6. 
 
There were no documents. 
 
Presenter: Indira Samarasekera, President and Chair, GFC 
 
Discussion: 
Further  to  the  information  provided  in  her  opening  comments,  Dr  Samarasekera  invited  questions  from 
members and attendees regarding the Provincial Budget. 
 
Members  expressed  comments  and  questions  in  relation  to  this  item,  including,  but  not  limited  to:    the 
possibility  of  cuts  by  the  Faculty  of  Arts  to  Community  Service-Learning  (CSL)  as  a  result  of  reduced 
funding  from  the  Provincial  Government;  clarity  from  the  Dean  of  the  Faculty  of  Arts  that  no  cuts  were 
being  contemplated  to  the  Faculty’s  CSL  initiatives;  and  the  tone  of  University-wide  and  leadership 
responses to the Provincial Budget. 
 
7.  Graduate Education at the University of Alberta 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenters:  Martin  Ferguson-Pell,  Acting  Provost  and  Vice-President  (Academic);  Mazi  Shirvani,  Vice-
Provost and Dean, Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research; Catherine Swindlehurst, Special Advisor to 
the Provost and Vice-President (Academic) 
 
Discussion: 
Acting Provost and Vice-President (Academic) Martin Ferguson-Pell outlined the contents of the so-called 
‘Swindlehurst Report’ to members, as well as the attached Action Plan, explaining that it was drafted by Dr 

General Faculties Council / 3/14/2013 
Page 7 

 
Swindlehurst  at  the  request  of  the  Office  of  the  Provost  and  Vice-President  (Academic)  in  late  2012 
following  extensive  consultation  across  the  University  of  Alberta  on  the  subject  of  improving  graduate 
education at the University of Alberta.   
 
Dr  Swindlehurst  reported  to  members  that,  during  her  consultations,  she  met  with  approximately  200 
people  which  included  representatives  of  18  Faculties  across  the  campuses  of  the  University,  and  she 
stated that participants were engaged and informative throughout the process.  She clarified that the scope 
of  her focus  during  consultation  included  administration,  recruitment, quality  measures,  and  professional 
development, all in relation to graduate education at this university. 
 
Dr  Ferguson-Pell  added  that  two  site  visits  had  been  conducted  by  a  small  team from  the  University  of 
Alberta  to  the  University  of  Toronto  and  to  Waterloo  University  in  order  to  observe  their  successful 
graduate education programs and corresponding procedures and practices, with specific attention paid to 
their funding models and information technology (IT)/administration systems. 
 
Dr Shirvani described the contents of the accompanying ‘Action Plan’ to members, explaining that quality 
measures are under development and outlining the concepts underlying the proposed Graduate Strategic 
Management Plan (GSMP). 
 
Dr Ferguson-Pell noted that areas for further improvement include institutional IT/administration systems 
related to graduate admission and programming and designated funding, adding that Principal Investigator-
driven grants also play a factor in providing quality graduate education and that areas of excellence must 
continue  to  be  supported  and  developed  as  well  as  those  programs  that,  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  are 
struggling.  
 
During  the  ensuing  discussion,  members  expressed  several  questions  and  comments  in  relation  to  this 
item, including, but not limited to:  that the Report is unclear and difficult to read; that the role of the Faculty 
of Graduate Studies and Research was not clarified within the Report; that the GSMPs will be difficult to 
complete  and  will  add  a  significant  workload  to  Faculties;  that  clarification  is  required  about  how  the 
gathered data within the GSMPs will be used; clarification about how the Provincial Budget will affect the 
Action Plan; and that the uniqueness of each Faculty prevents universal research funding thresholds.  
 
Dr  Ferguson-Pell  thanked  members  for  their  feedback  and  stated  that  these  matters  will  continue  to  be 
discussed. 
 
8. 

Fall Term Reading Week (Green and Gold Week) – Proposed Changes to the UAPPOL Academic 
Schedule Procedure from the Students’ Union (SU) 

 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenters:  Colten  Yamagishi,  President,  University  of  Alberta  Students’  Union;  Rory  Tighe,  Past-
President, University of Alberta Students’ Union 
 
Discussion: 
Students’  Union  (SU)  President  Colten  Yamagishi  described  the  Fall  Term  Reading  Week  proposal  to 
members, adding that it has taken three years to plan and has been the platform for three consecutive SU 
Presidents.  He stated that the consultation process was vast and included as many people as possible.  
He  explained  that  most  concerns  have  been  addressed  within  the  current  proposal.    He  outlined  the 
schedule associated with this proposed Reading Week, as contained in the proposal before members.    
 

General Faculties Council / 3/14/2013 
Page 8 

 
SU Past-President Rory Tighe outlined some of the ongoing concerns that continue to circulate including:  
the impact of a Fall Term Reading Week on the University’s Orientation; the timing of the proposed break; 
and  the  length  of  the  break.    He  explained  that  students  have  considered  all  of  these  issues  and  that, 
despite them, Students’ Council voted unanimously in favour of this proposal.  Mr Yamagishi added there is 
strong student support for the proposed timing of the break as well as the length of time, noting that a full 
week break in November allows a period of ‘recharging’ for students at a time when student counselling 
numbers increase and midterm exams are a major cause of anxiety.  Mr Tighe commented that the main 
impetus  of  the  proposal  is  the  preservation  of  student  mental  health;  he  added  that  similar  breaks  are 
offered at various other Canadian institutions. 
 
Dr Ferguson-Pell explained that, as per his “Approver” status within the Academic Schedule Procedure in 
the  University  of  Alberta  Policy  and  Procedures  On-Line  (UAPPOL),  his  role  is  to  gather  information  to 
determine whether or not he will approve the changes to the Academic Schedule Procedure, as set out in 
the proposal, and invited members to provide commentary on this proposed initiative. 
 
During the ensuing discussion, members expressed comments and questions in relation to this proposal, 
including, but not limited to: an expression of gratitude directed to the SU for revising the proposal so that it 
does not impact accreditation within some Faculties; concerns with the full week model; concerns that the 
proposal is not evidence based; individual expressions of strong support for the full week break; concerns 
that  the  proposed  break  in  November  is  too  late  in  the  term  to  have  the  intended  impact  for  students; 
concerns  that  a  break  situated,  instead,  in  October  would  be  too  early  in  the  term  to  have  intended 
consequences; that an earlier start date for the term could have cost implications for certain Faculties; that 
a break in November may isolate certain students; and that turnouts for mental health-related programming 
for students might be minimal. 
 
Dean  Allen  Berger  read  from  a  prepared  statement  that  contained  several  comments  regarding  the 
proposal,  including,  but  not  limited  to:    student  mental  health  remains  a  top  priority  to  Deans  and  the 
University of Alberta; that the proposal is not evidence based in terms of how the week off, proposed in 
November, properly addresses issues of student mental health; that a mid-November break is too late in 
the term to assist struggling students; that early identification of academic problems is crucial to solvency; 
that the best predictor of academic success is performance in the first term and that success in the first 
term  depends  on  successful  adjustment  within  the  first  weeks  of  that  term;  that  Orientation  would  be 
impacted  at  Augustana  Faculty,  as  it  is  not  run  by  students;  that  McMaster  University  just  instituted  a 
shorter break in October; and that Deans would like to collaborate with the students to address some of 
these issues. 
 
Mr  Yamagishi  acknowledged  his  willingness  to  work  with  Deans  to  address  their  concerns,  adding  that 
students are extremely supportive of the full week break. 

 

The Umbrella Committee (TUC) Report 

Dr Samarasekera stated that, in order to move forward in a positive manner on this student-led initiative, 
compromise between the SU and the Deans will be necessary and that evidence should be reviewed to 
come to an agreement satisfactory to concerned stakeholders. 
 
9. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenter: Martin Ferguson-Pell, Acting Provost and Vice-President (Academic) 
 
Discussion: 
Dr Ferguson-Pell spoke briefly to this Report.  Due to time constraints, however, there was little opportunity 

General Faculties Council / 3/14/2013 
Page 9 

 
for members to ask questions or engage in discussion on this item.   
 
10.  Question Period  
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
10.1Q/10.1R    Question  from  GFC  Member  Mr  Adam  Woods  (Undergraduate  Student  Representative) 
Regarding Residence Services’ Complaint and Response from Vice-Provost and Dean of Students Frank 
Robinson to Question Raised by Mr Woods 
 
10.2Q/10.2R Question from GFC Member Mr Roy Coulthard (Graduate Student Representative) Regarding 
Media Representation from an Alberta Post-Secondary Institution and Response from the Vice-President 
(University Relations) to Question Raised by Mr Coultard 
 
Discussion: 
Mr Woods and Mr Coulthard both acknowledged the responses to their submitted questions. 
 
Mr  Yamagishi  enquired  about  how  options  in  response  to  the  Provincial  Budget  will  be  determined  and 
suggested  that  members  of  the  academy  should  be  included  within  the  decision-making,  particularly 
through GFC and the Board of Governors.  Dr Samarasekera replied that there are established processes 
in  place  to  make  these  determinations  and  that  students  are  involved  through  their  participation  on 
governance  committees  and  will  be  afforded  many  opportunities  to  contribute  to  the  discussions.    She 
added that it would not be advantageous to create more processes. 
 
A member asked if there would be an opportunity ask questions and discuss further the final report of The 
Umbrella  Committee  (TUC)  (as  before  members  on  the  occasion  of  today’s  GFC  meeting).    Dr 
Samarasekera stated this report would be brought forward once again to the next meeting of GFC to allow 
for discussion. 
 
INFORMATION REPORTS 
 
11.  GFC Executive Committee Minutes of January 9 and February 4, 2013 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
12.  Reports of the Board of Governors of February 8, 2013 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
13.  E-Mail Report of the GFC Nominating Committee (January 7, 2013) 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
14.  E-Mail Report of the GFC Replenishment Committee  
 

 

 

 

 

General Faculties Council / 3/14/2013 
Page 10 

 

Information Items Forwarded to GFC Members Between Meetings 
 

 
There was no report to date. 
 
15. 
 
There were no items to date. 
 
16.  Reports 
 
There were no reports to date. 
 
CLOSING SESSION 
 
17.  Adjournment 
 
The Chair adjourned the meeting at 4:00 pm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R:\GO05 General Faculties Council - Committees\GEN\12-13\MR-14\Minutes\Final-Minutes.Docx