OPENING SESSION 
 
1.   Approval of the Agenda 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Motion:  Amaral/Kennelly 
 
THAT the General Faculties Council approve the Agenda. 

Approval of the Open Session Minutes of November 26, 2012 

 
2. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Discussion: 
Mr Woods and Mr Sumar suggested minor amendments to the Minutes of November 26, 2012. 
 
Motion:  Cormack/Molzahn 
 
THAT the General Faculties Council approve the Minutes of November 26, 2012, as amended. 

 
3.  Comments from the President 
 
The Chair noted this was the 387th meeting of General Faculties Council (GFC).  President Samarasekera 
reported:   
 

  On the recent student mental health initiative that brings $3 million of Provincial Government funding 
to the University of Alberta to expand mental health services to students.  She expressed her thanks 
to all of the University staff whose leadership was instrumental to the creation of the program and 
noted that Dr Donna Cave, Director, University Health Centre, provided exceptional direction with 
regard  to  the  program’s  development.    Dr  Samarasekera  stated  that  she  was  excited  to  see  the 
program’s impact as it provides assistance to students. 

  On the Provincial Budget.  She stated that due to recent issues within the oil and gas industry, the 
Province  of  Alberta  is  ‘revenue  challenged’,  which  has  created  uncertainty  with  respect  to  the 
Provincial  Budget.    The  President  reported  that  her  team  continues  to  work  on  the  institutional 
budget  for  2013-2014  and  that  she  continues  to  meet  with  representatives  of  the  Provincial 
Government to emphasize how critical the 2% funding previously committed is to the University of 
Alberta. 

  On the Board of Governors’ upcoming strategic retreat, planned for April, 2013.  She reported that 

CARRIED 

CARRIED 

General Faculties Council / 1/21/2013 
Page 4 

she recently met with Mr Douglas Goss, Chair, Board of Governors, and was pleased with his vision 
of reviewing strategic planning for the University of Alberta.  She added that with all of the changes 
and current challenges within higher education, it is a good time for the Board of Governors to hold 
such a retreat.  She stated that Mr Goss will be meeting with Deans, students, staff, and other key 
stakeholders to obtain their feedback before the retreat and encouraged all members to contact him 
with any engaging ideas or issues they may have in relation to strategic planning/directions for the 
University of Alberta. 

  On  a  letter  from  undergraduate  student  members  of  GFC  regarding  student  involvement  at  GFC 
and GFC Standing Committee meetings.  She stated that she recently met with Acting Provost and 
Vice-President (Academic) Martin Ferguson-Pell, University Secretary Marion Haggarty-France, and 
Secretary to GFC Garry Bodnar regarding a plan to re-energize GFC.  She added that two of her 
ideas  include  changing  the  location  of  GFC  from  Room  L1-490  ECHA  and  examining  ways  that 
members’ time can be best utilized at GFC meetings, including reviewing what items come before 
GFC for its consideration and discussion.  Dr Samarasekera stated these ideas will be discussed 
with members of the GFC Executive Committee.  She pledged that a written response to the letter 
from these students would be provided in due course. 

  On her ‘State of the University’ address.  She noted that her address will take place on February 28, 
2013,  at  12:30  p.m.,  in  Room  L1-490,  ECHA.    She  remarked  that  she  will  address  a  number  of 
issues including invigorating GFC and her remaining goals before her term as President concludes. 

 
ACTION ITEMS 
 
4.  New Members of GFC 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenter: Indira Samarasekera, President and Chair, GFC 
 
Discussion:  There was no discussion. 
 
Motion:  Molzahn/Sumar 
 
TO APPOINT/REAPPOINT 
 
The following  non-academic  staff member  elected  by  the  Non-Academic  Staff  Association  (NASA)  for  a 
term concurrent with his term of appointment on the Board of Governors (November 28, 2012 to November 
27, 2015):  
 

Christopher Pu                  Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 

 

 

Proposal for Non-Departmentalized Status for the University of Alberta’s School of Public Health 

 
5. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenter:  Lory Laing, Interim Dean, School of Public Health 
 
Discussion:   
Dr Laing introduced her proposal by explaining that the School of Public Health is the newest Faculty on 

CARRIED 

General Faculties Council / 1/21/2013 
Page 5 

CARRIED 

 

In  November,  2012, 

transparent  and  open. 

 
campus,  created  from  the  combination  of  the  Department  of  Public  Health  Sciences  and  the  Centre  for 
Health Promotions Studies. It has been in existence since 2006.  The School was recently accredited as 
the first  public  health  school  in  Canada.    In  2012,  the  School  underwent  an  academic  unit  review,  and, 
based on that review, it was recommended at that time that the School become non-departmentalized.  Dr 
Laing  noted that the  School  is  highly  collaborative  and  that the  existing  separation  of the two  units  was 
stifling research and collaboration on its academic programming and other educative functions. 
 
The  Interim  Dean  continued  by  explaining  that  she  had  struck  a  Task  Force  in  the  Summer  of  2012  to 
review this issue further, and this group consulted widely across all members of the School, with a goal to 
formulate  a  plan.    This  process  included  focus groups,  interviews,  online  participation,  and  a  Town  Hall 
meeting.  As information was gathered, it was shared across the School’s community so that the process 
would  be 
the  Task  Force  recommended  non-
departmentalization.    She  added  that  the  proposal  was  presented  at  a  School  of  Public  Health  Council 
meeting in late November, 2012 and, subsequently, by means of an electronic vote in which all Council 
members were participant, was passed by a clear majority.  She noted that students as well as alumni are 
supportive of the proposal. 
 
Dr Samarasekera stated that she supported this endeavor and congratulated the School of Public Health 
on their recent accreditation as well as their many successes. 
 
There was no further discussion. 
 
Motion:  Laing/Belosevic 
 
THAT  General  Faculties  Council  recommend  to  the  Board  of  Governors  the  proposal  for  a  non-
departmentalized  structure  for  the  University  of  Alberta’s  School  of  Public  Health,  as  submitted  by  the 
Interim Dean of the School of Public Health (on behalf of the School) and as set forth in Attachment 1, to 
take effect upon final approval.      

 
