DISCUSSION ITEMS 
 
6. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenter: Indira Samarasekera, President and Chair, GFC 
 
Purpose of the Discussion: For information. 
 
Discussion: 
President Samarasekera explained to members that she will be creating an arm’s length GFC Task Force 
to review GFC and its Standing Committees, noting that the review will examine Terms of Reference for 
GFC  and  each  GFC  Standing  Committee,  compare  them  with  the  Terms  of  Reference  and  activities  of 
other  GFC  Standing  Committees,  and  ensure  that  there  is  a  clear  delineation  between  governance  and 
administration.  She stated that now is the time to ensure that processes at the University of Alberta are 
streamlined,  effective,  and  strategic,  and  she  added  that  GFC  should  be  a  forum  in  which  substantive 
discussions and debates occur.  She added that she hopes to decrease the level of repetition within the 
governance process, ensuring that members’ time is utilized efficiently in an environment when there is a 
need to do more with fewer resources. 
 
She  reported  that  the  GFC  Task  Force  will  be  populated  by  two  faculty  members  with  expertise  in 
governance as well as one graduate student representative who, similarly, has some expertise in this area.  
She stated that a report from the GFC Task Force will be presented to the GFC Executive Committee and 
to GFC in the Fall.  
 
During the ensuing discussion, members expressed several comments and questions, including, but not 
limited  to:    that  it  is  beneficial  to  routinely  review  governance  processes  for  efficiency;  clarification  on 
whether the University of Alberta has faculty members with an expertise in university governance; how the 
review aligns with “Dare to Deliver”; clarification of the scope of the review; that GFC is seen by some to be 
a “rubber stamp”; that the GFC Executive Committee retains a lot of power and is seen to be operating 
beyond  GFC;  concern  that  some  GFC  Standing  Committees  report  to  the  Board  of  Governors  and, 
seemingly, not GFC; that all GFC Standing Committees should report directly to GFC; that the material on 
this  item,  provided  to  members,  did  not  contain  information  on  the  inclusion  of  the  graduate  student 
representative on the GFC Task Force; a suggestion to include an undergraduate student representative 
on  the  GFC  Task  Force;  concern  that  the  summer  months  would  not  be  enough  time  to  complete  the 
review; and clarification about the cross-over between administrative issues and governance. 
 
At  the  conclusion  of  the  discussion,  Dr  Samarasekera  noted  she  was  amenable  to  this  Task  Force 
including an undergraduate student representative. 
 
7. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenter: Martin Ferguson-Pell, Acting Provost and Vice-President (Academic) 
 
Purpose of the Discussion: For information. 
 
Discussion: 

The Umbrella Committee (TUC) Report 

General Faculties Council / 6/3/2013 
Page 8 

Budget Principles (and Update) 

 
 Dr  Ferguson-Pell  explained  that  ‘The  Umbrella  Committee  (TUC)  Report’  represents  the  final  report  for 
TUC, adding that the Strategic Initiatives Group (SIG), under the direction of its Chair, Dr Erasmus Okine 
(who was in attendance at this meeting of GFC), will address any remaining topics not considered by TUC 
during  the  time  in  existence.  He  noted  that  all  other  matters  are  being  considered  by  the  Renaissance 
Committee (REN). 
 
Members expressed several comments and questions in relation to this item, including, but not limited to:  
clarification with regard to the role of REN; and clarification about Central Administration’s plan to address 
the issue of indirect costs of research. 
 
ACTION ITEM 
 
8. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenters:    Martin  Ferguson-Pell,  Acting  Provost  and  Vice-President  (Academic);  Phyllis  Clark,  Vice 
President (Finance and Administration) 
 
Purpose  of  the  Proposal:    Section  3(4)(a)  of  the  GFC  Academic  Planning  Committee  (APC)  Terms  of 
Reference on budget matters states that GFC APC is to “recommend to GFC on budget principles.” The 
budget principles as recommended by GFC APC at its meeting of May 22, 2013 are attached for GFC’s 
consideration. 
 
Discussion: 
Dr Ferguson-Pell explained to members that in an effort to provide clear guidelines for the University of 
Alberta to direct future academy-wide changes, a set of budget principles had been drafted. 
 
Members expressed a number of comments and questions in relation to the budget principles, including, 
but not limited to:  a suggestion to include the words “publicly funded” within principle 1; clarification about 
the meaning of “demonstrable excellence”; a suggestion to amend punctuation within the document; that 
Central Administration may not be able to minimize job losses because certain losses will be directed and 
decided by individual Faculties; clarification about increasing international student enrolments but not the 
number of Canadian students; that Central Administration may have minimal control over increasing the 
number and quality of graduate students; clarification about how the costs of new initiatives will be weighed 
against the need to maintain existing programs and staff in the current financial climate; clarification about 
communicating with frequency and openness in relation to releasing each Faculty’s budget letter publicly; 
whether  Central  Administration  could  release  the  budget  letters  to  University  of  Alberta  leaders  “in 
confidence”; a suggestion to include an “unintended consequences” clause into the principles; a suggestion 
to include a principle that might address increasing workload and changing working conditions for existing 
staff;  that  there  could  be  issues  surrounding  equity,  as  a  large  percentage  of  full  professors  are  male; 
clarification  about  the  details  of  determining  Faculty-specific  differential  cuts;  that  the  principles  do  not 
include information about process; clarification about what is being done to prepare for cuts in 2014-2015 
and 2015-16; clarification about the future impact on tuition rates; and clarification about resource planning 
to ensure that international students maintain their health and wellness while at the University of Alberta. 
 
Members discussed suggested revisions and the Mover and Seconder to the Motion before Council agreed 
to several ‘friendly amendments’ to the budget principles. 
 
Motion: Belosevic/Ingles 
 

General Faculties Council / 6/3/2013 
Page 9 

 
THAT  General  Faculties  Council  recommend  to  the  Board  of  Governors  the  budget  principles  that  will 
guide  the  University  in  developing  the  strategies  that  will  enable  the  institution  to  achieve  a  sustainable 
budget,  as  provided  by  the  President’s  Executive  Committee  and  as  set  forth  in  Attachment  1,  as 
amended, to take effect upon final approval.                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                          CARRIED 
 
DISCUSSION ITEM 
 
9.  Question Period  
 
There were no questions. 

 

 

 

INFORMATION REPORTS 
 
10.  GFC Executive Committee Minutes of March 4, 2013 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
11.  Reports of the Board of Governors of March 15, 2013 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
12.  E-Mail Report of the GFC Nominating Committee (April 2, April 23, and May 13, 2013) 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
13.  E-Mail Report of the GFC Replenishment Committee (April 26, 2013) 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
There was no discussion. 
 
14. 
 
There were no items to date. 
 
15.  Reports 
 
There were no reports to date. 
 
CLOSING SESSION 
 
16.  Adjournment 
 

Information Items Forwarded to GFC Members Between Meetings 
 

 

 

General Faculties Council / 6/3/2013 
Page 10 

 
The Chair adjourned the meeting at 3:40 pm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R:\GO05 General Faculties Council - Committees\GEN\12-13\JN-3\Minutes\Final-Minutes.Docx