OPENING SESSION 
 
1.  Approval of the Agenda  
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Motion:  Profetto-McGrath/Cormack 
 

THAT the General Faculties Council approve the Agenda.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                       CARRIED 

 
2.  Approval of the Minutes of September 16, 2013  
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Motion:  Cormack/Chelen 
 

THAT the General Faculties Council approve the Minutes of September 16, 2013. 

CARRIED 

 
3.  Comments from the Acting Chair  
Acting  Chair  Dr  Martin  Ferguson-Pell  welcomed  members  to  the  391st  meeting  of  General  Faculties 
Council (GFC) and commented on the following: 

GFC General Faculties Council 10/28/2013 
Page 4 

 
-  Updates regarding the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 University of Alberta budget. 
-  The extension of congratulations to several members of the University of Alberta community including 
Professor  Tim  Caulfield,  Board  of  Governors  Chair  Douglas  Goss,    Professor  Anne  McLellan,  and 
Dean John Kennelly for recent personal and professional accolades. 

-  Updates about the University of Alberta’s international rankings. 
-  Updates about recent meetings with the the Premier of Alberta and the Deputy Premier and Minister of 
Enterprise and Advanced Education (EAE) regarding Campus Alberta, tuition, funding models, results-
based budgeting, the Post-Secondary Learning Act (PSLA), and the Alberta Institute concept.  

-  An update about the Letter of Expectation (LOE).  Dr Ferguson-Pell noted that the Board of Governors 
had  reviewed  the  LOE  and  approved  it  for  signature  by  the  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors.    He 
thanked members of the community for their feedback on and engagement surrounding the drafting of 
the LOE. 

 
ACTION ITEMS 
 
4.  New Members of GFC  
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenter: Martin Ferguson-Pell, Acting Chair, General Faculties Council (GFC), and Acting Provost and 
Vice-President (Academic) 
 
Discussion:  
There was no discussion. 
 
Motion:  Shirvani/Mummery 
 
MOTION I: TO APPOINT/REAPPOINT [This motion may be proposed only by statutory members of GFC 
– VPs, Deans, statutory students or elected faculty members]:  
 
The  following  graduate  student  representative,  to  serve  on  GFC  for  a  term  beginning  immediately  and 
ending April 30, 2014: 
 

Misha Miazga-Rodriguez 

Faculty of Science 

 
The following non-academic staff representative nominated by the Non-Academic Staff Association (NASA) 
for a term beginning immediately and ending June 30, 2014: 
 

  Rod Loyola 

 
 

President, Non-Academic Staff Association (NASA) and  
University of Alberta International 

The following academic staff member to represent administrative professional and faculty service officers, 
for a term beginning immediately and ending June 30, 2014: 

David Whalen                                     Buildings and Grounds Services, Facilities and Operations 

 
                                    
                                                                                                                                                         CARRIED                                                                                                                                                

GFC General Faculties Council 10/28/2013 
Page 5 

 
