OPENING SESSION 
 
1.  Approval of the Agenda  
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Motion: Lynch/Kusmu 
 

THAT the General Faculties Council approve the Agenda. 

 
2.  Approval of the Minutes of October 28, 2013  
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Motion: Bryden/Cormack 
 

THAT the General Faculties Council approve the Open Session Minutes of October 28, 2013. 

CARRIED 

CARRIED 

 
3.  Comments from the President  
President  and  Chair  Dr  Samarasekera  welcomed  members  to  the  392nd  meeting  of  General  Faculties 
Council (GFC) and commented on the following: 
 

 General Faculties Council 11/25/2013 
Page 4 

 
-  The successful and inspiring Fall 2013 University of Alberta Convocation. 
-  Accolades to members of the University of Alberta community for various prestigious professional and 

-  The  final  Renaissance  Committee  (REN)  Report.    Dr  Samarasekera  thanked  members  of  this 

personal achievements. 

committee for their hard work and effort. 

 
3.1  Leadership Initiative  
Dr Samarasekera expressed her thanks towards Council for their continued interest in this issue and noted 
that, while it is still in the early stages of development, the Acting Provost and Vice-President (Academic) 
has struck a committee to review the initial stages of the Leadership Initiative, with this body composed of 
broad representation from Administration, the Deans, faculty members, and students.  She reported that 
this committee would preliminarily establish the framework for this project.   
 
She  thanked  students  for  their  comprehensive  feedback  on  the  Leadership  Initiative  and  acknowledged 
their position paper on the matter.   
 
She cautioned members to separate the proposed student residence from the idea of a leadership college 
and  noted  that  the  college  will  be  broad  and  inclusive  and  will  provide  students  with  transformative 
leadership opportunities.  She noted that there are still big decisions to be made surrounding the size of the 
college  and  how  it  will  be  both funded  and  managed.    She  stated  that  she  will  continue  to  consult  with 
students  (and,  as  necessary,  Council)  on  these  important  issues.    The  President  also  commented  that, 
generally, there needs to be more student residence spaces on the campuses of the University of Alberta. 
 
Dr  Samarasekera  concluded  by  stating  that  this  matter  would  again  be  discussed  by  GFC  once  further 
details have been established. 
 
3.2 
Dr Samarasekera reported that she has been in the process of drafting an ‘action plan’ in response to the 
Board of Governors’ reaffirmation of institutional excellence pledged at its April, 2013 strategic retreat.  She 
noted that this action plan is centered around the themes of academic transformation, sustainable financial 
modeling,  efficient  administration,  and  fostering  a  culture  of  change.    She  stated  that  the  plan  will  be 
presented to the Board of Governors at its December 13, 2013 meeting, followed by a presentation to GFC 
on February 3, 2014. 
 
A  member  enquired  about  when  GFC  members  will  get  an  opportunity  to  debate  the concepts of  these 
issues and followed up with a question relating to the approval of colleges. 
  
ACTION ITEMS 
 
4.  New Members of GFC  
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenter: Indira Samarasekera, President and Chair, GFC 
 
Motion: Hickey/Shirvani 

‘Change Agenda’ for the University of Alberta 

 General Faculties Council 11/25/2013 
Page 5 

 
 
MOTION I: TO APPOINT/REAPPOINT [This motion may be proposed only by statutory members of GFC – 
VPs, Deans, statutory students or elected faculty members]: 
 
The following undergraduate student representative to serve on GFC for a term beginning immediately and 
ending April 30, 2014: 
 
                                 Pravin Wedage                           Faculty of Engineering 

CARRIED 

 
