OPENING SESSION 
 
1. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Motion: Belosevic/Rodgers 
 
THAT the General Faculties Council approve the Agenda. 

Approval of the Agenda 

Approval of the Minutes of June 3, 2013 

 
2. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Motion: Mills/Kelly 
 
THAT the General Faculties Council approve the Minutes of June 3, 2013. 

CARRIED 

CARRIED 

 
3.  Comments from the President  
 
President  and  Chair,  Dr  Indira  Samarasekera,  welcomed  all  to  the  390th  meeting  of  General  Faculties 
Council (GFC) and reported on: 

General Faculties Council 09/16/2013 
Page 4 

 
 
-  The  University  of  Alberta  Budget.    She  briefed members  on  the  timeline  of  events  in  relation  to  the 
institutional  budget,  beginning  with  the  unexpected  announcement  by  the  Provincial  Government  on 
March  7,  2013  of  a  7.3%  cut  in  funding,  adding  that,  following  this  news,  the  University’s 
Comprehensive  Institutional  Plan  (CIP)  was  amended  accordingly  and  reflected  a  request  from  the 
University of Alberta to run a deficit for three years in order to allow adequate time to plan around the 
incurred  substantial  budget  shortfall.    She  reported  that,  despite  earlier  indications  the  Ministry  of 
Enterprise and Advanced Education (EAE) was receptive to the three-year proposal, a letter was sent 
by the Minister of EAE to the University’s Board of Governors stating that the institution would not be 
allowed  to  run  a  deficit  past  2014-2015.    She  reported  that  since  March  7,  2013,  members  of  the 
Senior  Administration  (including  the  Deans)  have  all  been  actively  engaged  in  budget  planning 
activities, including a number of meetings held over the summer months. She noted that there are still 
several unknown factors in regard to the financial health of the institution, including the impact of the 
Voluntary Severance Program (VSP) for all continuing academic staff and  whether the University of 
Alberta  will  be  able  to  assess  inflation  adjustments  to  tuition.    She  stated  that  transparency  has 
remained  a  top  priority and  that  her  Office  will  undertake  a  comprehensive  benchmarking  project to 
ensure  that the  University  of  Alberta  administration  is  the  right  size.    She  concluded  by  stating  that 
although the next few months will be difficult for those at the University of Alberta, excellence will be 
maintained through the outstanding efforts of the students, staff, and faculty at the institution. 

-  Her recent trip to China.  The Premier’s Office had invited her to join Premier Alison Redford on a trip 
to China and that, recognizing the opportunity to represent Alberta post-secondary education as well 
as  the  chance  to  discuss  the  University  of  Alberta’s  challenges  with  the  Premier  in  person,  she 
accepted  the  invitation.    She  noted  that  during  the  trip,  in  addition  to  engaging  the  Premier  on  the 
University’s  challenges  including  improving  access  and  providing  a  quality  student  experience,  she 
presented  at  a  conference  on  investments  in  Alberta,  attended  the  Premier’s  keynote  address, 
participated in a panel discussion, and attended a forum on the future of post-secondary education, 
along with representatives from a number of international universities.  She concluded by reporting that 
a summary of the trip would be posted on her blog shortly. 

 

A member enquired about whether the names of the members of the President’s Academic Governance 
Task Force had been announced. 
 
 3.1  Academic Governance Task Force - Update 
 
There were no documents. 
 
Presenter: Indira Samarasekera, President and Chair, General Faculties Council 
 
Purpose of the Proposal: For information/discussion. 
 
Discussion: 
Dr  Samarasekera  briefed  members  on  the  rationale  for  and  the  history  of  the  President’s  Academic 
Governance Task Force, adding that there was difficulty in finalizing the Task Force membership over the 
summer months but that it was anticipated the Task Force would meet this Fall and have a report for GFC’s 
review in early 2014. 
 
4.  Comments from the University Secretary for the New Academic Year 
 
There were no documents. 
 
Presenter: Marion Haggarty-France, University Secretary 

General Faculties Council 09/16/2013 
Page 5 

 
Discussion: 
Ms  Haggarty-France  welcomed  members  to  the  new  General  Faculties  Council  (GFC)  venue  in  the 
Centennial Centre for Interdisciplinary Science (CCIS), emphasizing her gratitude towards members of the 
Faculty of Science, the Office of the Registrar, Facilities and Operations, and Academic Information and 
Communication  Technologies  (AICT)  for  their  collaboration  and  cooperation  in  selecting  an  appropriate 
new  venue  for  GFC.    She  stated  that  GFC  requires  maximized  engagement  as  the  main  academic 
governing body of the University of Alberta, and she reminded members that it derives its authority and 
powers  from  the  Post-Secondary  Learning  Act  (PSLA),  which  can  be  accessed  through  the  University 
Governance website. 
 
As well, the University Secretary encouraged members to reference the University Governance website for 
meeting  schedules, meeting material,  and  committee-specific  Terms  of Reference.    She  also  noted  that 
she conducts throughout the academic year several free informative “Governance 101” sessions and that 
registration can be completed, as well, on the University Governance website. 
 
Ms  Haggarty-France  concluded  her  remarks  by  thanking  members  for  their  continued  service  and 
commitment towards collegial academic governance at the University of Alberta. 
 
ACTION ITEMS 
 
5.  New Members of GFC 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenter: Indira Samarasekera, President and Chair, General Faculties Council 
 
Discussion:  
Mr Bodnar noted the addition of Professor Marcia Spetch, Faculty of Science, to ‘Motion II: To Receive’. 
 
Motion I: Shirvani/Cormack 
 
MOTION I:  TO APPOINT/REAPPOINT [This motion may be proposed only by statutory members of GFC 
– VPs, Deans, statutory students or elected faculty members]: 
 
The following Chair of Chairs’ Council, for a term beginning July 1, 2013 and ending June 30, 2014: 
 

Kathleen Weiss 

Chair, Department of Drama (Faculty of Arts) 

 
The following President of the Association of Academic Staff of the University of Alberta (AASUA), for a 
term beginning July 1, 2013 and ending June 30, 2014: 
 

 

 

Kevin Kane 

President, AASUA 

 
The following academic staff member to represent University Library Academic Staff, for a term beginning 
July 1, 2013 and ending June 30, 2016: 
 
 
 

Kathleen DeLong 

     Libraries 

 

CARRIED 

 

General Faculties Council 09/16/2013 
Page 6 

 
Motion II: Kelly/Cormack 
 
MOTION II:  TO RECEIVE [This motion may be proposed by any member of GFC]: 
 
The following ex officio members, to serve on GFC for a term beginning July 1, 2013 and extending for the 
duration of their appointment: 
 

Joanne Profetto-McGrath 
Robert Haennel 
Joseph Doucet 
Kue Young 
Anna Altmann 

Acting Dean, Nursing 
Acting Dean, Rehabilitation Medicine 
Dean, Business 
Dean, School of Public Health 
Interim Director, Library and Information Studies 

 
The following statutory faculty members who have been elected or re-elected by their Faculty to serve on 
GFC for terms beginning immediately and ending June 30, 2016: 
 

Yongsheng Ma 
Mark Loewen 
Raj Gupta 
Tarek El-Bialy 
Dilini Vethanayagam 
Kent Stobart 
Godfrey Man 
Deborah Burshtyn 
Rhada Chari 
Bruce Sutherland 
Greg Kondrak 
Marcia Spetch 

 

Faculty of Engineering 
Faculty of Engineering 
Faculty of Engineering 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry 
Faculty of Science 
Faculty of Science 
Faculty of Science 

  
  CARRIED      

Letter of Expectation 2013 (University of Alberta Section) 

 
 
6. 
 
Materials before members are contained in the official meeting file. 
 
Presenters: Martin Ferguson-Pell, Acting Provost and Vice-President (Academic); Debra Pozega Osburn, 
Vice-President (University Relations) 
 
Purpose  of  the  Proposal:  To  review  and  provide  advice  on  the  draft  University  of  Alberta  section  of the 
Letter of Expectation with Enterprise and Advanced Education. This section, along with the Comprehensive 
Academic and Research Institutions (CARI) section, the Campus Alberta section and the Government of 
Alberta section, will form the Letter of Expectation (LOE) between the University of Alberta and the Ministry 
of Enterprise and Advanced Education (EAE). 
 
Discussion: 
Aided  by  a  PowerPoint  presentation,  Dr  Ferguson-Pell  provided  members  with  a  brief  outline  of  the 

General Faculties Council 09/16/2013 
Page 7 

 
contents of the Letter of Expectation (LOE) between the Ministry of Enterprise and Advanced Education 
(EAE) and the University of Alberta, explaining that the three sections that comprise the LOE, are first, the 
Comprehensive Academic and Research Intensive (CARI) institutions section, second, the Campus Alberta 
section, and finally, the section specific to the University of Alberta.  He added that the document requires 
alignment  with  the  University  of  Alberta’s  other  guiding  documents,  including  Dare  to  Deliver,  Dare  to 
Discover, and the Comprehensive Institutional Plan (CIP), and that during the draft phase, comprehensive 
consultation  was  sought  regarding  the  revisions  to  the  LOE,  from  both  input  from  key  groups  at  the 
University of Alberta as well as comments posted on the Colloquy blog and Ideascale. 
 
He reminded members that following their feedback and formal recommendation of the document, the LOE 
would  be  submitted  to  EAE  on  Friday,  September  19,  2013,  and  that  it  would  be  given  back  to  the 
institution for consideration at the Board of Governors meeting of October 18, 2013. 
 
Dr Pozega Osburn added that the level of community engagement in drafting the LOE was comprehensive, 
including  13,000-14,000  online  views  of  the  LOE,  116  specific  comments  gathered  from  Ideascale  and 
Colloquy, and substantial attendance and online participation at the Brown Bag Forum. 
 
During the lengthy ensuing discussion surrounding the LOE, members expressed several comments and 
questions, including, but not limited to:  clarification about the definition of “professor” on the second page 
of the document; that the document seems defensive in tone; how feedback on the previous Memorandum 
of Understanding (MOU) has been incorporated into drafting the LOE; clarification about certain editorial 
changes including the title and deleted paragraph on page one; clarification about the difference between 
the  MOU  and  the  LOE; clarification  about  amendments to  a  previous  section  on  student  participation  in 
governance; clarification about the process of Board of Governors approval of the LOE. 
 
Following  a  brief  discussion  about  amendments  made  to  the  document  at  the  GFC  Academic  Planning 
Committee (APC) meeting of September 11, 2013, as well as confirmation of the appropriate governance 
procedure, Mr Kusmu made a ‘Motion to Amend’ the LOE. 
 
Motion to Amend:  Kusmu/Chelen   
 

THAT  General  Faculties  Council  amend  page  3  of  the  University  of  Alberta  section  of  the  Letter  of 
Expectation (LOE) 2013 to include the words “increased student engagement” within the last bullet point 
of the document.                                                                                                             

 
Mr Bodnar clarified that, as per GFC’s procedural rules, Motions with a five or less vote difference require 
an automatic re-vote, with the results of the second vote being final. 
 
Motion to Amend (Second Vote):  Kusmu/Chelen   
 

THAT  General  Faculties  Council  amend  page  3  of  the  University  of  Alberta  section  of  the  Letter  of 
Expectation (LOE) 2013 to include the words “increased student engagement” within the last bullet point 
of the document.                                                                                                             

 
Motion:  Doucet/Profetto-McGrath 
 
THAT General Faculties Council recommend to the Board of Governors the University of Alberta section of 
the Letter of Expectation (LOE) 2013 (to be provided to the Ministry of Enterprise and Advanced Education 

DEFEATED                                                                                                                                             

DEFEATED                                                                                                                                             

General Faculties Council 09/16/2013 
Page 8 

 
(EAE)), as submitted by the Offices of the Provost and Vice-President (Academic) and the Vice-President 
(University  Relations),  to  take  effect  upon  signing  by  the  Minister  of  EAE  and  the  Chair  of  the Board  of 
Governors for the University of Alberta. 

CARRIED 

Leadership Initiative 

 
